[Music]
that's sick hi my name is Johnny Mendez
you may recognize her from our previous
wired video I was chief of disguise at
the CIA today I'm breaking down clips
from movies and TV about spies and
disguise roll clip this is a box of
passports in the Bourne Identity
[Music]
this is not the reality there is no box
of passports there are no huge bundles
of money
no guns this sort of denigrates that the
expertise required to do alternate
identity documents it's painstaking it's
meticulous you check another name for me
we don't do them just in case
john-michael can they're too precious
yeah you do them one by one as they're
needed they're not waiting for you
around the world I don't know about that
picture I don't know who I am
dine here homeland traveling along this
motor say I'm sorry yes carries disguise
which basically consisted of dyeing her
hair just get it over with okay I
thought was absolutely ineffective still
carry with dark hair you think I know
that she could have cut her hair and
restyled it that's not necessary she
could have changed her makeup I had a
long day she could have put on some
glasses to hide that kind of crazy eyed
look that she has that you know tell me
jumps out at you when you see her
character and what do you mean yeah I
didn't think that was effective at all
why are you doing this to me
in a similar scene in alias she dyes her
hair in a bathroom before she goes
through security
[Music]
you ever tried this him it's too late
for me what do you think what she did
was absolutely spot-on thank you and she
didn't just dye her hair she dyed it
outrageously red and then adopted the
whole thing that went with it including
chewing gum while she's walking through
the airport and then she has that that
back-and-forth with with the airline
agent I though that was a brilliant
thanks this is a great example of
distracting someone lipstick use I love
a sweet talking to them getting them
engaged and getting them away from the
things you don't want them looking at
window we could have used that as a
training film
I know long-term alias the Americans
have you been in my family his disguises
were convincing tell me what you saw he
was comfortable in them his wigs were
excellent he was never trying to look
good he was trying to fit these
characters that he had built when it
came really close to projecting the
little gray man that we always would
talk about at CIA that was sometimes
often that was the goal you wanted to be
forgettable we have to safeguard the air
security officers getting into disguise
is a lot like method acting the look is
part of it
but if you're gonna wear it for more
than a minute you need to inhabit it
have you been Martha that's what he does
big day at FBI counterintelligence he
becomes the guy in the disguise that the
bureaucrat the nerd did you get a look
inside this time the actor in him
combined with the disguise I thought he
was brilliant thank you the next clip is
quick changed mission impossible
three
I've talked about quick-change
previously for Wired quick-change is the
ability to clandestinely change your
appearance you have 37 seconds to come
out with those changes it was not
unusual for us to layer disguises so
you'd have the the true person and then
he would wear disguise number one and
then on top of that would be disguised
number two we would never let that piece
of a disguise fly away that's evidence
there are three covers that are
basically off-limits to CIA and that
would be a religious figure Media figure
and Peace Corps not that we don't like
the Peace Corps we love the Peace Corps
but it has to stay kind of pure you got
to do what's right
it cannot be suspected of harboring CIA
officers can you imagine
priests are so vulnerable they're just
out there if they're accused of being a
spy they don't have any structure to
protect them they're too vulnerable we
also don't use the media as a cover same
reason it's good for another example of
quick change take a look at Teenage
Mutant Ninja Turtles
[Music]
now that I got you
I think the change into the schoolgirl
outfit was actually very well done
hearing that demonstrates a great
precept that we always operated under
and that is that basically the bigger
the crowd the more forgiving they are if
you want to change your clothes in
public you can do lots of things you
would never dream of doing no one pays
any attention that's the whole point
we use that a lot in our training
exercises back here right it was always
a way to lose surveillance you have
surveillance and you have to get away
from them to do whatever you need to do
practicing surveillance isn't following
her face they never are they're
following her profile profile was a
blonde wearing dark rimmed glasses in a
pencil skirt and she just removed all of
those pieces it was well done and so to
look at another shopping quick-change
let's look at baby driver
[Music]
[Applause]
as you can see this time the alarms go
off the intent was good the execution
was okay but again you have to ask
yourself would we really recommend that
because the odds of him getting caught
and arrested for shoplifting are just
too great if you have everything with
you
at the beginning and you start revealing
it you start removing things and you
have a bag where you can store some
things and maybe even a bag to put that
bag in that works but we don't recommend
stealing blending in with the crowd
Casino Royale is on the move is on the
move and he's heading straight for me
stop touching me here
[Applause]
in this opening scene the man in the
crowd was called out from having his
hand up he's holding on to his earpiece
and he was so caught up in that motion
that he forgot and it was a it was a
giveaway it started the whole scene we
found the way around that by inventing
something that didn't exist it was a
harness that we was body mourning a
receiver that would be in our ear that
we never had to touch and an induction
loop that went around our neck right so
we could receive and it would transmit
to the earpiece it was a no hands kind
of system perfectly
officer choosing disguise Pink Panther I
think he would like this one very much
I'm particularly part of the enlarged
pores right here about looking good oh
this scene it was all about looking good
are you having those four noses so the
officer didn't get to choose which nose
he was going to wear we would have made
him a custom nose he didn't get to
choose the teeth we would have made the
team yeah some teeth on the house goatee
if it was there do you think you do you
think you do a lot of that would have
been custom made some of it could be
off-the-shelf what we were interested in
is giving him a total look that he
didn't have to like but he had to wear
it we had to feel that he would wear it
look what you have done nobody left our
labs looking better your genius then
after our labs looking different yeah
boy the next clip is a worker uniform 24
makes sense to me
this entire country will know what we
look like in the next few hours people
do that with military uniforms there a
lot of uniforms that are just
universally recognized there are
hundreds of video cameras in there oh
those are repairmen they're fine anyone
asks we're working on the air
conditioner get into one of those groups
and you disappear and your identity
becomes the identity of the group and
that's a good thing
Ivan agreed it we don't have stores of
maintenance uniforms or military
uniforms we've got nothing we can
arrange anything all right let's get the
sofa cover story Argo
Ben Affleck is playing my husband Tony
Mendez in the movie Argo my name is Tony
Mendez the story of an exfiltration one
of many ex filtrations that my husband
undertook over the years more than 30
years ago we undertook a secret mission
to save six Americans trapped in Iran
this was a very successful exfiltration
I'm gonna get y'all in this particular
clip the sixth house guests as we call
them we're using the the cover of a
Hollywood location scouting team
production is a that was a subject they
thought they could easily talk about
they could talk about Hollywood movie
people do and be believable this would
be first so as a cover story it was
carefully selected don't have any
alternatives they came up with a
Hollywood location scouting party
they're a Canadian film crew on a
location scout for a science fiction
movie rather than disguise them we more
restyled them these cover identities
were created specifically for each one
of when they were choosing the cover for
these six houseguests posing Howard
what's his occupation officially it was
unique because it was a group of people
not just one person they had to find a
cover that all six of them could
believably
speak about leave that you're these
people so much that your dream like them
looking at Argo gives us an opportunity
to look at a real cover story and see
how it was executed and see how it was
carried off and to see that it performed
its function
masks Mission Impossible
[Music]
this is pure CGI of course this is what
we called an overhead mask we could
change your gender we could change your
ethnicity we could turn you into almost
anything course so we couldn't guarantee
that that mask would animate very sorry
to hear you say that we were stuck with
the measurements that we were presented
with what's that masks are always
additive you can't put a small nose over
a larger nose you have to make sure that
your donor and your recipient are well
matched probably right we had some
aluminum molds that came out of
Hollywood they came in large medium and
small the size large was an old
Hollywood actor named Rex Harrison so he
was taking part in a lot of interesting
operations without his knowledge I think
Jesus let's move on to the second
Mission Impossible
was mission impossible it's really good
you could make a mask with someone
underneath it with their with their
mouth taped closed but I can't think for
the life of me of a purpose for doing
that you don't know what you're missing
you can still breathe through the nose
but it's always a relief to know that
you can also breathe through the mouth
and so by taping the mouth you you
really start restricting their other air
intake Freddie's gonna oh joy how did
they make these masks let's look at
Mission Impossible 3
[Music]
what if I said we had it so you know
when you go to the dentist and you have
a dental impression taken that's what we
did to your whole face being very
careful to keep your your nose open so
that you could breathe while this was
happening stop talking the mask that we
just saw is a mixture of Lights CGI
again and there they're flipping back
and forth from the real actor to the
actor wearing the mask and it's it's
invisible to tell where the real actor
comes back in and is is animated it's a
trick wonderfully done thanks so we'll
go to spy hidden identities you'll be
given a new identity your name is penny
Morgan you're a divorced housewife from
Iowa you've sold more Mary Kay products
than anyone else in your state it's a
pretty funny take on being issued a new
a new identity certainly not the
identity that she wanted what do I have
ten cats is that even illegal she didn't
get to choose and the vice president of
the Ames Garden Club I couldn't even be
president the bits and pieces the the
identity cards the things they were
issuing to her is what we would call
pocket litter no there's the Tim chance
those would be the things that any of us
would carry around and in our bill
folder in our purse that's a new there's
a similarity here with the Pink Panther
Clinton she didn't like the identity
that was being proposed but then she
didn't really get to choose was Pepe
LePew not available cultural customs
inglourious basterds
shampoos greg lays it that ominous look
tells you that something bad has just
happened I'm say let's go ahead British
soldier counted wrong on his hands glaze
it in Europe when you're counting you
start with your thumb one two three
doing it this way show to him that he
was not even European certainly wasn't
German it was a dead giveaway
we know from travelling around the world
that every country has its own customs
and zero foolishness
and it's incumbent on us to learn those
customs to know those customs and to not
violate any of their their procedures
this is the infra hot know-how just
don't feel sometimes when you've been
found out there is no escaping once
you've committed one of those errors you
you have outed yourself so to speak and
you kind of have to go with the
consequences whatever those consequences
are well if this is it oh boy I hope you
don't mind if I go out speaking the
Kings gadget room
Kingsman I've had a lot of fun with this
one of our finest examples of chemical
engineering poison the poison in the pen
there's a real history to that Shaw
thought we put a lot of things in pens
they were not equipped and they were not
used as weapons in some instances they
would conceal a camera but we had a
couple of scenarios with agents they
said I will work for you but I would
like poison actually insist on having an
L pill which is a lethal helped me feel
because I don't want to give them the
opportunity to do what they would like
to do to me electrocute the two cases
that I know of we put L pills into
fountain pens remotely activate and in
one case our agent was captured and he
was gonna be interrogated and he said
before I do that give me my pen I will
write my confession and they handed him
his pen and he bit down on it on the tip
they said he was dead before he hit the
floor you know so there's a there's a
history to the poison in pens nobody
would've these thing couple of the other
things in there are less historically
correct but wildly entertaining
[Music]
that's he's sick the scientists disguise
the saint I'm here to do an interview
with that dr. Russell I'm an exposure as
a fraud he's wearing a disguise that
would send most people away from him and
his demeanor is so very pretty imposing
and so really frightening in a way she's
working a lot out of me that draws
attention and you never want to draw
attention so I would rate that disguise
as a failure glasses as a disguise
Superman Lois Lane say hello to Clark
Kent poor George Thunder hey anyone
who's ever watched Superman wonders Lois
can't you see Clark is the newspaper
reporter and Superman is the superhero
dude me physically they're exactly the
same kind of natural Superman's glasses
our first impression ridiculous Oh
doesn't make sense
poor Lois yeah poor Clark breaking in be
kind rewind
[Applause]
is that ladder again what do you think I
don't know it was funny the first time I
saw it but to a professional I it looks
sloppy
it looks poorly planned when you plan to
an operation you always had Plan B what
if it goes wrong go get some ice cream
in my office we had people that
specialized in going into places that
they should not be in I can't be here
we're doing and doing things there that
they should not do perhaps we think
Italy me almost ever speak to you our
operations were typically just
meticulously planned we never planned to
be hiding behind the chain-link fence
nevertheless I know some of our people
that not that they were caught but that
they got stuck where they had to stay in
place maybe for a day or two where they
could leave some funny stories talking
about alias names Austin Powers allow
myself to introduce myself my name is
Richie Cunningham and this is my wife
Oprah awesome powers makes you laugh
yeah baby
alias names at CIA are closely
controlled they are managed they are
assigned to you my name is number two
you end up with a name for your entire
working career come again your true name
is never on paper overseas Ruby baby
Oprah would probably not be one of those
names is my wife
Oprah any name that really drew
attention would not be one of those
names Cunningham was it that she could
happen could be but we always had a
middle initial danger is my middle name
you always had three names I mean you
could abbreviate the middle initial but
you always had three names Austin danger
power my name for a life my first name
was faith very shagadelic and so
whenever I see anything that has to do
with faith like keep the faith baby I'm
like okay
Oh behave furniture camouflage Sherlock
Holmes
who delivered this parcel the usual chat
New York Curia we never tried to
disguise ourselves in the furniture at
the CIA but there is a story about James
Comey at the White House he was trying
to blend into the curtains behind him
his suit and the curtains were the same
blue wearing a blue suit was trying to
blend in with the blue curtain he was
trying to hide that way
unsuccessfully another furniture
camouflage in this next movie called spy
hard we used furniture concealments for
a number of things technology comes
mostly to mind if you had spy gear in
your house and you're in a foreign
country and it's a controlled society
you don't want your receivers and
transmitters sitting around so we would
build them into selected pieces of
furniture trying to remember if we ever
had something like that for a person
James even when we had some things that
we built to exfiltrate people out of the
country
exfiltration containers could be in
various configurations at the
International Spy Museum we have an
exhibit from checkpoint charlie where a
lot of people exfiltrated themselves out
of the East a lot of them were in car
concealments they would be special
spaces built into cars for the purpose
of exfiltrating that person across the
border
undercover accents 22 Jump Street
everyone stay in the body or sleepy he'd
like to Mexico Wolverine is here and my
partner here you want to see that
product when he talking yeah first of
all you would speak the language you
wouldn't try and use an accent no
talking about we actually pay some
people to study the languages to become
fluent in the languages
and swipe swipe but it's a made-up thing
they seem totally unprepared and you
sense that maybe they're gonna get
arrested or worse disguising voice the
dark night I wanted yogurt you wanted me
your Batman has a very specific disguise
beyond his voice the voice wasn't really
even necessary
we're in hockey man we tried to change
voices we wouldn't use voice modulation
technology but we would try to
physically change the palette the
palette of your mouth thank to our
dismay it did not change your voice it
would just make you list forever
you could consciously try and change
your voice that's like consciously
limping after a while you just forget
and your regular voice comes back we had
no success with that this symbol of open
I can never be cover story Fletch
names Liddy gordon Liddy Lord take a
look at the seventh Fetzer valve oh yeah
I think it's been sticking probably
humidity maybe I should take a look at
it Gordo back here well Fletch has made
the mistake of not studying his cover
story but well enough before he before
he took it on the road right yeah we
would always pick a cover story that our
people could talk about intelligent lean
it's so simple maybe you need a
refresher course we would never pick a
professional area where they were
clueless and where they would come off
like Fletch did Gordon yeah I know where
it is I'm just getting a bird's-eye view
here spy seduction alias
stories about seduction in the Espionage
business our Allegiance this house in
your house some of them are based on
truth was a famous seductress that
worked for American intelligence during
the Cold War who did some amazing things
went into a couple of embassies and took
some ciphers out of some safe most of
the stories though have to do with the
Russians and the Germans swear to God
the Russians even had a name for it they
called him swallows although a friend of
mine Jason Matthews wrote a book
recently called red Sparrow and he
called them sparrows who become the
Germans had men who were trained the
same way and they called them Romeo's so
the use of sex to collect intelligence
is not unheard of and it's probably
going on today speaking of red Sparrow
here's a clip from a seduction scene why
would the CIA officer fired his gun
[Music]
according to his story which he says is
based on truth they had a school where
they trained young women in seduction
the only deal in psychological
manipulation to quite a degree take off
your clothes you can imagine that this
was a school that produced graduates you
must learn to love on come on and
Jennifer Lawrence is supposed to
represent one of those successful
graduates goodbye Dominika
I think it presented to a lot of
American audiences the idea that that
was you know that's a piece of the
intelligence machine in Moscow nobody
belongs to the state it takes it to
another level now you might want to ask
me if the CIA has a school I suppose
we'll find out and I would tell you we
don't we mustn't be so judgmental this
is a typically a Russian technique the
state asks something in return
clown disguise James Bond's hey is
anyone else in there
if I human carnival I can't actually say
whether a CIA officer has ever changed
into a clown suit there was a lot to be
said for fitting into your environment
into your surroundings correct we're in
a clown so you look like one of them
instead of an outlier I'm a surgeon so
in that regard it makes a point so god
fake telling Who I am
during the Second World War there was an
agent named Virginia Hall who disguised
herself as a shepherdess with a flock of
sheep to conceal her prosthetic leg and
she was lethal general this man's either
drunk or crazy this kind of cat suit is
a popular trope let's take a look at the
Avengers 1998
they use climbing gear but not really
black cat suits you must be true I think
the reason is because women look so good
in them or at least Hollywood women did
them most of our men and probably a
majority of our women would not have
been caught dead in a black cat suit
dark athletic clothes are fine
technically but not a black cat suit I
feel acting drunk with Veronica Mars
how long must a girl play drunk and
wailing before someone tries to get her
to take off her clothes I would not act
drunk undercover and I don't think most
officers would because it would defeat
your purpose
I know officers who have gotten drunk
undercover but they didn't go in meaning
to do that because a lot of the work
used to be at those black-tie Affairs
where there was a lot of Scotch a lot of
liquor running around
I think I'd sooner drink mark McGrath's
bathwater than drink anything here and
we're told at the CIA that there are
things that you can drink and eat before
you go that will coat your stomach and
they'll help they think I'm drunk or
worse if you need to appear like you're
drinking do that without actually having
a you can just tell the bartender I want
7up check out your ways to go about it
where you don't get drunk conclusion the
writers and directors do everything they
can to get it really right half the fun
for me is watching closely to see what
they get wrong and that's a wrap